Hi, and welcome to the lecture on
some basic notation and background
as part of the regression class in
the Coursera Data Science Specialization.
My name is Brian Caffo.
I'm a professor in the Department
of Biostatistics at
the Bloomberg School of
Public Health here at Johns Hopkins.
The class is taught with my co-instructors
and colleagues here, Jeff Leek and
Roger Peng.
In this lecture, we're just going to
cover some basic definitions.
These are things you probably already saw
in the prerequisite for this class in
a statistical inference, part of the
Coursera spe, Data Science Specialization.
However, because they're so
fundamental to regression,
we're going to cover them again anyway,
so they're fresh in our minds.
I'm going to try and minimize the amount
of mathematics that's required for
this class.
However, for those that are interested
with the appropriate caveats before
starting to go through them, I'm
going to cover some of the mathematics.
I'll also have some more advanced lectures
that I'll put on YouTube and some other
outlets for people who are interested in
the very high level treatment of this.
Throughout the lectures, we'll,
we will neither require calculus nor
linear algebra.
And when it does get a little
bit more mathematical,
I'll let you know when you can
skip over those sections, and
I'll try to be clear about what
would be needed for the evaluations.
Okay, so let's go over some of
the important notation relevant for
this class.
So, the biggest bit of notation that
you're going to have to get used to index
a variable with a set of subscripts
to denote an ordered collection.
So, we might write X1,
X2 up to Xn to describe n data points.
So, as an example,
consider the data set 1, 2, 5.
Then, X1 is 1, X2 is 2, X3 is 5,
and n in this case is 3.
There's nothing in particular
about the letter X.
We could have just as
easily described Y1 to Yn.
The last bit of notation that's important,
is we're typically going to use Greek
letters for things we don't know,
population things we don't know,
such as mu for a population mean.
And then we'll use non Greek letters or
regular letters to denote
things that we can observe.
So, x-bar is something we can observe.
Mu is something we can't observe and
would like to estimate.
So, let's make use of our new notation.
Let's try to find the sample
mean of a data set.
Well, we all know what the sample mean is.
We take our data, add them up, and
divide by the number of observations.
So, we usually denote a sample mean
by the, a letter with a bar over it.
So, x-bar is the sample mean
in my collection of X's.
So, that's just 1 over n,
times adding up all the X's.
Notationally, we write this as the sum and
symbol, where we index it from i equal 1
to n of the Xis, and this is just simply
notation for saying, add up all the Xis.
Notice, if we subtract a mean
from every data point,
then we wind up with a new
data set with n observations.
However, this new obser,
this new data set has mean 0.
So notationally,
if I define Xi tilde as each Xi point,
subtracting off the mean,
then this new data set,
the Xi tildes, have mean 0.
This process is called
centering the random variables.
And you can check it, empirically by
simply generating a bunch of vectors,
subtracting the mean from each
element of the vector, and
taking the mean of the vector.
And you'll see that it's always 0.
Also, recall from the previous
lecture that the sample mean
Is the least squared solution.
So if we want to find the value of mu,
that minimizes summation
Xi minus mu squared.
Then that mu works out to be x-bar.
Since we talked about means,
let's talk about variances.
The variances is usually
denoted by s squared.
And I give the formula right here.
1 over n minus 1, summation.
Xi minus x-bar quantity squared.
This is nothing other than basically
the average squared deviation
of the observations around the mean.
There's a shortcut formula
which I give over here.
The empirical standard deviation is
simply the square root of the variance.
And it's nice to work with
standard deviations because
the variance is expressed in
whatever units X has squared,
whereas the standard deviation is just
expressed in the normal units of X.
Another interesting fact kind of related
to send, not unlike sendering is scaling,
so if we subtract a mean
off from every observation,
we get a resulting data
set that has mean 0.
If we divide every observation
by the standard deviation,
the resulting data set will
have standard deviation 1.
This is called scaling the data.
If we take our original data now and
subtract off x-bar,
then take the resulting centered data and
scale it by s.
We get a new data set, let's call them Zi.
And these have empirical mean 0 and
empirical standard deviation 1.
This process of centering and then
scaling is called normalizing the data.
So, normalized data are centered at 0 and
have units equal to standard
deviations away from the mean.
So as an example, if something has
a value 2 from normalized data,
that means that the data point was 2
standard deviations larger than the mean.
As its name would suggest,
normalization is an attempt to make
otherwise non-comparable
data sets comparable.
Now, let's talk about the most
central quantity in regression,
the empirical covariance and,
and really the correlation,
which is maybe a little
bit better to think about.
So, imagine I have two ve, two vectors,
x and y, and they're lined up.
So X1 might be the BMI for subject 1 and
Y1 might be the blood pressure for
subject 1.
And X2 would be the BMI for subject 2.
And Y2 would be the blood pressure for
subject 2, and so on.
So, you could meaningfully
do a scatter plot.
Then we just define the covariance between
X and Y as 1 over n minus 1, summation of
the X's, X deviations around their mean,
times the Y deviations around their mean.
I give a shortcut formula over there.
The correlation is simply
the covariance then
standardized into a unitless quantity.
So, the correlation is
the covariance of X and
Y, which has units,
basically units of X times units of Y.
And then, we divide by a standard
deviation, standard deviation of X and
standard deviation of Y, and
we get a unit-free quantity.
And we'll end our whirlwind tour
of notation with some basic
facts about correlation.
So, the correlation has to between,
be between minus 1 and plus 1.
And it's only going to achieve these
bounds, minus 1 or plus 1, when the X and
Y observations fall
perfectly on a positively or
negatively sloped line respectively.
In other words, a positive line for
a correlation of 1 and
a negative line for
a correlation of minus 1.
The correlation measures the strength of
the linear relationship between X and Y,
and we'll see it's central
in linear regression.
The stronger, we're,
we're estimating a stronger relationship
the closer the correlation is toward
the extremes minus 1 or plus 1.
And a correlation of 0 implies
no linear relationship.